# 2024-07-17 ECMA-402 Meeting

## Logistics

### Attendees

- Shane Carr - Google i18n (SFC), Co-Moderator
- Jesse Alama - Igalia (JMN)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Louis-Aimé de Fouquières - Invited Expert (LAF)
- Philip Chimento - Igalia (PFC)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJS Foundation (RGN)
- Yusuke Suzuki - Apple (YSZ)
- Frank Yung-Fong Tang - Google i18n, V8 (FYT)

### Standing items

- [Discussion Board](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/projects/2)
- [Status Wiki](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/wiki/Proposal-and-PR-Progress-Tracking) -- please update!
- [Abbreviations](https://github.com/tc39/notes/blob/master/delegates.txt)
- [MDN Tracking](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402-mdn)
- [Meeting Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/embed?src=unicode.org_nubvqveeeol570uuu7kri513vc%40group.calendar.google.com)
- [Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#tc39-ecma402:matrix.org)

## Status Updates

### Updates from the Editors

RGN: We had cleanup from Anba, purely editorial. We landed the normative note about browser locales depending on agent strings; don't remember exactly when it landed.

SFC: I believe that the GA approved the 2025 edition. That would have happened in Geneva at end of June. Haven't verified.

RGN: Likely they did.

### Updates from the MessageFormat Working Group

EAO: Addison Philips is stepping back, so I am stepping up to chair the working group moving forward. I'm hoping that not a lot will change logistically, and that Addison will be able to continue participating. We're also in general working towards the CLDR 48 release. We're looking at solutions for percent formatting and datetime formatting, which might diverge from JS. We're building a datetime formatting approach that is more similar to what ICU4X is building, semantic skeletons.

EAO: Silly things become more difficult for users to use. To note: functions in MF will continue to diverge from functions in JS Intl space. In terms of what options they provide, what they enable. But divergence is a step towards a better implementation, and which won’t conflict with what we have in JS. For MF as a whole will be a subset of what we enable in JS formatters.

SFC: Attending meetings more regularly to help with cross-cutting issues. Thanks for chairing the group and moving these things forward. This group might be relevant for some cleanup work.

### Updates from Implementers

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/wiki/Proposal-and-PR-Progress-Tracking

YSZ: Not much to share. New development next month.

SFC: A few open PRs. Numbering systems, plural rules…require implementations to ship. Stage 3 proposals: Intl.LocaleInfo. Looks like it’s almost ready.

EAO: No updates from me for Mozilla.

### Updates from the W3C i18n Group

SFC: I’d like to increase engagement with this group. Not sure if it’s increasing.

EAO: Best look at intersection of what we’re doing. Not a lot of i18n activity in W3C on HTML or other things. Other things impact i18n, but for us in JS we may not necessarily care. Lack of need for interaction may be a good sign.

SFC: One idea: hallway track discussions at Web Engines Hackfest about an HTML element for datetime formatting. Maybe message formatting. More ideas than proposals at this point.

EAO: With customizable select HTML has opened door to elements that generate content in the DOM. Effectively a requirement for what you describe. Maybe more opportunity for this now, but I’m not aware of any particular proposal that we need to be aware of.

SFC: That was an issue raised at Web Engines Hackfest. If there’s precedent, we can leverage that.

## Proposals and Discussion Topics

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/projects/2

### Consider unshipping islamic and islamic-rgsa calendars #971

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/issues/971

SFC: Last time we went through a proposal I made, with an example. Long discussion with HJS. Most comments uncontroveral, except for a comment by PFC. Temporal only has calendars it supports, and those are more strict. We can have additional fallbacks, but which might not exist in Temporal. I had proposed it to be ild (implemnentation and locale-dependnta). If some impls want to fallback to … that’s compliant, but … is also compliant. Not sure is HJS wants the fallback rule to be more strict.

PFC: Objection to middle line throws: I don’t like it, but I don’t see any other way. Don’t count me as objecting to that.

SFC: HJS proposed there being a error text/console warning. “We don’t accept ‘islamic’, please specify one.’ That might be helpful. 

SFC: HJS was the one with the most opinions last month. I thought DLM would be here, but he’s not. EAO? Do you have any comments?

EAO: I don’t have an official Mozilla opinion to present. I think emitting a warning ended up being decent. Personally, not much invested in this.

SFC: One thing about ILD is that it’s probably the smallest change to the spec, which currently has no requirements. We should anyway add that the return value should be a Temporal-supported calendar, and it's already the case that the locale's calendar is ILD. Making the requirement stricter (that it returns islamic-tbla), as HJS might prefer, is a change that could sit on top of that, made as a normative PR against the proposal. So what I prefer is a stepping stone approach: we could do ILD here and do stricter things later. Trying to work as chair to help make progress but not step on toes.

SFC: Given that DLM and HJS aren't on the call today, I'm doing my best to try to propose an intermediate compromise that can unblock the proposal while still leaving room to finalize the decision.

EAO: No further thoughts.

RGN: Same.

SFC: OK, then PFC I think you can move forward.

PFC: Yep, I'll work on it. Probably involves removing some rows from some tables.

SFC: I can do a holistic review.

PFC: While we’re talking about 2.7 reviews, EAO you were also listed as a 2.7 reviewer. Are you still willing to do that?

EAO: Willing to do it. Waiting for an explicit ask.

PFC: Still a couple of PRs pending, so I’ll ask in a few days.

SFC: Do we need consensus here for 2.7? No issues remaining in the milestone. Do we approve going to 2.7, pending PR reviews?

EAO: Looking at the 2.7 requirements for proposal-keep-trailing-zeroes: reviewer approval as well as editor approval needed, too? This might mean: For changes touch 402, we as TG2 ought to approve things. Not sure what the TC39 process means for us.

SFC: Typically stage 2.7 (previously 3 – this would be the first 2.7 402 proposal) we asy that among the reviewers, one should be an editor. Implies either RGN or USA here. Or BAN. I assume USA would be happy to review.

RGN: I'm planning to review it.

SFC: Anyone here have concerns about asking for stage 2.7 later this month?

(silence)

### Keep trailing zeros in Intl.NumberFormat and Intl.PluralRules

https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-keep-trailing-zeros/pull/4

EAO: (presents slides, see PR)

https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1hKJFrDfiGeqPWm51fQFQb4M4CeYm3ultB7Opef1BVuE/edit?slide=id.p#slide=id.p

SFC: Couple of questions. String IntlMathematicalValue. “Number of decimal digits in the source text”. On the next slide, you say significant digits. Not exactly the same thing. Could be leading zeros. We do support leading zeroes. Should this only focus on trailing zeroes? Do we need leading zeroes, trailing zeroes, or both?

EAO: Do we support parsing leading zeros?

SFC: No.

EAO: I think that’s a whole other matter. Changing IntlMathematicalValue into a Record makes it easier to consume data you mention i.e. preserve leading zeroes. But I’d rather not add that to the proposal.

SFC: I’m ok with that answer. Make clearer that we’re not talking about leading zeroes, I think “significant digits” is a more correct term for this.

EAO: What you want is to make sure we don’t say “significant digits”.

SFC: "Significant digits” is correct. “Decimal digits” raises concerns.

EAO: I think it’s valid since we don’t support them in parsing. My understanding is that in the semantics of Intl MV significant digits and decimal digits are equal.

SFC: I’m not sure we use the term “decimal digits” in many places. Just wanted to highlight this. Another question: have we thought about how this interacts with rounding priority option? Should this interact with that option?

EAO: No changes on rounding priority selection. Works equivalently well whether we format via significant digits or fixed digits. Accepts any value for rounding mode.

SFC: I think for this issue, I’ll take another look later. Another question: trailing zero display option. I agree there are 3 possible options. What’s your proposal for the meaning of the “auto” option?

EAO: My preferred solution: this proposal; does not touch trailing zero display option at all. We get default, padding trailing zeroes in input string. With stripIfInteger, they get stripped potentially.

SFC: With “auto”, nothing changes. With “stripIfInteger”, you want everything stripped, regardless of other options?

EAO: Yes. Don’t want to touch rounding behavior. 

SFC: So what’s the 3rd option that we could add?

EAO: stripFromString would recreate current behavior. Formatting from a string, trailing zeros are discarded. Get current behavior that way. My preference is that this not be added unless someone comes up with a decent reason for doing so.

SFC: With those comments, I think this is something I’d like to review. I’ll do that this week.

RGN: I’m feeling positive. I’ll do my review soon.

SFC: Do we have agreement in TG2 for advancing this proposal to Stage 2 and/or 2.7?

RGN: I'm feeling positive but I haven't done an editor review yet. But I'm willing to express my support.

SFC: +1

YSZ: No strong opinion. I think it's fine.

PFC: +1

### Proposal Measure for Stage 2

https://github.com/tc39/proposal-measure/pull/34

EAO: Repo still called “proposal-measure”, but if accepted for stage 2, perhaps rename to “amount”., That’s what we’d like to advance. “Measure” showing up at this point would be confusing.

SFC: There are some slides.

https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1my6X1ODDckzJmtcWcFI9hRF_I06Z4RQwrq81lbo8wPM/edit?slide=id.p#slide=id.p

EAO: We're presenting Amount. It originally made Stage 1 in October 2024. We are presenting it for Stage 2 with a reduced scope, with some of the other features deferred to proposal-smart-units or an upcoming TG2 proposal.

EAO: The spec says that you need to represent a mathematical value, but doesn't specify exactly how.

EAO: What we are presenting still has a lot of value (see slides).

EAO: (presents the data model)

EAO: (presents the semantics)

EAO: Note that this requires a change to Intl.NumberFormat to not throw an exception with style: "currency" if a currency isn't provided in the constructor, since now the currency is provided later.

EAO: (presents the open questions)

SFC: Shape of the proposal, and more specific questions.

EAO: All questions welcome. But perhaps we could look at questions from others.

SFC: Let's talk about "round on the way in" or "round on the way out" (#35).

LAF: In my opinion, 1,2xx is always a mistake if 1.2.significant digits is 2. Can’t go back to 4 significant digits. July 2 2027, well that means July 17th. (?) Not a matter of implementation, matter of usage. We seem to be unable to choose between the two ways.

EAO: You’d be strongly in favor of the last line outputting “1.200”?

LAF: It would be the least-worst solution.

SFC: I’ve been in favor of rounding on the way in. which outputs “1.200”. Constructor does the rounding, as opposed to toString. But what would be the favor of the other approach? One of the main advantages of the 2nd approach would prevent double rounding. maxFractionalDigits on an Intl.NF. And then we have an Amount, and try to format it, we might do double rounding. Significant digits 2 and then significant digits 1, you could do incorrect roundmg. We generally want to avoid double rounding. Do I think this is a problem? I see reasons that it’s not a big problem: require some work on NF. My position is that formatting with an amount, you shouldn’t set options on Intl.NF. If you do that, you get double rounding. But by default we don’t do rounding. Work that EAO on keep-trailing-zeros helps. One additional change: we have a maxFractionDigits of 3. If the input is an Amount, we should drop that constraint. I’d like to fiddle around with that. Assuming we can make those changes, double rounding shouldn’t be a big issue. 

SFC: The other argument you could make is: you can do double rounding when convering to a lower-precision datatype. If you round a string when constructing an amount, then construct a number, you might get double rounding. But I don’t think this matters much. This requires a lot of significant digits. Rounding to significant digits 4, thios isn’t an issue. Spending tiem on this to try to predict what the pushback would be.

JMN: When I was first thinking about Amount, the second approach (round on the way out) first was more intuitive to me: we don't throw away data. But now I see downsides to it.

EAO: The thing that convinced me to support the first approach is what we are currently doing. We don't keep track of whether it was created from a String, a BigInt, etc. We just have an Amount of the specified value. Retaining the additional precision of that value is mixing and matching: we retain this info about the input but not that info.

SFC: Let's talk about the next question (#36).

LAF: I would prefer to distinguish between "unit" and "currency". For example, cents and dollars should be different.

EAO: If we enforce that an Amount created from a Currency creates an integral value only up to the digits of the currency in question, it doesn't allow representing fractions of a cent, which do occur in financial situations.

SFC: Amount or currency is transparent. MAybe we need limits. No semantic meaning for any option. No rounding when handling currencies. Perhaps we could have a flag…when we start knowing about these values, we could have a feature “round to default precision”, and if ther’s a currency, you could round to that suitably. Doesn’t need to go in this version of the proposal.

LAF: OK

EAO: Intent of design of Amount is a data holder and thus as far as possible unopinionated as long as it’s a finite mathematical value plus a unit and maybe precision. In the 262 understanding should be just as good to have an amount in Euros as an amount in mana or pebbles or anything. Limitations on what can be done would be coming from Intl.NF limitations. That provides some additional functionality, too. Amount in 262 doesn’t know or care about these things. Default currency precision feels like a thing where we have a bit of data in Intl.NF that might be useful to expose to the outside. Construct Intl.NF style=currency will have a min/max fractional digits accessible only via resolvedOptions. Is that enough? We could bring some of that functionality into this, but perhaps later. Amount is quite generic.

RGN: Makes sense to me too. You’re probably right that there should be another way to expose this stuff, but not a 262 Amount.

EAO: Amount build with a currency identifier, and Intl.NF knows and .toLocaleString will give you the correct and expected behavior. So an amount of 1.2 euros will give you “1.20€”. 1.2 JPY would be “1 [yen symbol]” for .toLocaleString.

SFC: Regarding representation of MVs: are you open to…the constraints we put on strings in IntlMV are the same as what we put on Amount? Are you open to considering that? If you take that huge string you get “infinity” as you point out. My expectation would be that that’s what you’d get when creating an amount. My preference would be for having some kind of limits. In other words, c.toString should also return “Infinity”.

EAO: Why impose Intl limits on Amount?

SFC: Same as limits on decimal range. I think implementations won’t like that. No machine type for mathematical values. Closest we have is an unparsed string. When we try to round it, we may have some heavy lifting. In ICU4X has “decimalquaity”, “digit list”, “fixed decimal” so we can store an array of digits (each in 4 bits)...that could be a representation. But even that is limits in size. Limit to slightly more than what Intl.NF requires. Most digits would can have in Intl.NF is 400 or so. You can store that on the stack if you want. You can store this in 200 bits. Decimal128 is 128 bits. Still a small amount on the stack. We also store precisions of the value, which are perhaps 2-3 bytes. I’m also speaking of experience with Temporal. We started with matheamtical values. But then we changed it and put limits down. Yo’re imposing a machine type for mathematical values. Limits would keep the implementation flexible. But to allow this to be used, we could have limits.

EAO: 2 follow-on questions. Can you please make an isuse? We’d include that in the presentation for TC39. 2nd question: where does the upper limit on bigint come from? Implementations agree on having the same upper limit.

FYT: I think in the spec there is a limit.

EAO: BigInt upper limit would be better in my opinion rather than ICU4X limits. No objection to limits, but I’d be happier if the ask for that comes from someone doing implementation.

SFC: I do carry a bit of weight as an implementer here.

EAO: I don’t see why Intl limits are particularly relevant for us. Let’s include this as a 3rd opt.

JMN: I agree that this is a good question to ask, and it is appropriate for the TG1 call.

FYT: Implementation have limits for good reasons. BigInt is heavy. This is a tradeoff. Radical hypothesis (?) but everyone has to carry weight in efficiency. You want to cover a high percentage of use cases. We can have a big limit, but then there’s a tradeoff that everyone carries.

SFC: This isn’t the shape I was originally thinking, but it has properties I like and I think it’s important for the language to have this type. My original idea was “decimal with precision”. If this reckoning of the type is something the committee feels more comfortable with, then this can be useful. HAving a way to represent this stuff is important for 262, and this is a clean way to do it.

EAO: Amount isn’t built for performance because it doens’t provide arithmetic or other options for doing things with MVs. Just holds a number, and allows you to read it out. If  you have a large value in the Amount, no way to make the operations around that fast. You’d have to do that in JS, you’d need to get that value out as a string. Presumably this would be slow, maybe require reparsing. Cost of having a large capacity when the value is large…gets swallowed up by the user code around it. From an implementation POV, vast majority of Amounts are probably representable with Number. Something that works in the Number range and then something else for values beyond that. But I don’t know.

SFC: Motivation slide: lean more into introducing a common immutable interface on dealing with numbers with amounts. If we don’t do this, then we might be asked for have a protocol, as some delegates have suggested. Then that protocol would be a way for representing amounts. Much better for JS developers would be something the language provide. The role of TC39 is to provide such a type. That way, others can have an amount. It would be immutable, it has a name, it interacts with Intl…in the future, maybe interacting with decimal. That motivates Amount, apart from Intl. Those are pushing us to add this, but the needs have existed for a long time. Although Intl and Decimal are the things that push us to do this now, it’s well-motivated and worthwhile to add to the ecosystem.

SFC: Do we have agreement in TG2 for Amount going to Stage 2?

RGN: It has my support.

SFC: It has my support.

YSZ: No strong opinion. I think it's fine.

PFC: +1

### Normative: Add missing name property for %IntlSegmentsPrototype%[%Symbol.iterator%] #1015

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/pull/1015

SFC: How does this manifest? Is this what we’re talking about?

RGN: This is the name of the function.

SFC: How does that manifest?

RGN: Segments prototype is your _ss_. Bracket symbol.iterator.name . I think it was already noted in the PR. As far as I can tell, every implementation already implements it this way; it’s just missing in the spec.

SFC: Segments object itself doesn’t have a name?

RGN: It might. Segments object does not have a name.

SFC: (works through code snippet)

RGN: We should use .name in the example. The reason I’m being dodgy about this is Function.protype.toString is underspecified.

SFC: So this is web reality. I support the change.

RGN: I double-checked and JSC deviates. But SpiderMonkey, V8, and GrawlJS align with this PR.

SFC: Look into this before the TG1 meeting.

YSZ: Can you update the… I'd like to know if it is fine to fix it? What is the deriving point?

RGN: Returns the string "anonymous".

YSZ: OK, looks fine to me.

SFC: Do we have TG2 approval to move forward with this pull request?

YSZ: +1

RGN: +1

EAO: +1

### Normative: Don't add default formatting to lone timeZoneName #958

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/pull/958

SFC: Previously discussd in February.

PFC: Do we want to continue pursuing this? For me it’s not a high priority. Annoying for people wanting to format name of the timezone or name of the era that you can’t do that the way you can with some of the other units. To move forward with this, we’d need actual data. Not a high priority for me to do that research. If we want to keep these open pending such research, that’s ok, but closing this would also be fine.

SFC: My feeling: I look at 2 things: What could people do? What code should people write? Think of stable formatting: people could write, but they shouldn’t have written it. If it caused some web breakages, I’d still be in support. We have avenues available to us to make the impact of that change small. My concern here is that arguably people shouldn’t write, but it’s OK. If I were coming from Mars, I wouldn't think there’s anything wrong. We know that when you use this API, all other fields get erased. It was surprising that when you specify a timezone name, we were surprised that the other fields don’t get erased. What do others think?

SFC: Another thought: this is deliberate. Authors wanted this. Overwriting year month day is OK, but timezone name is separate enough that it doesn’t require overwriting year-month-day.

PFC: Not clear to me whether it was deliberate. For example, the era one, it’s plausible that it was accidental. The step where you need default to false with year month or day, but doesn’t include era. Maybe that was an accidental omission when eras were added to the spec.

SFC: IF I go to the original version and search for “era”. CreateDateTimeFormat..this is a big function. Intl.Collator, Intl.NumberFormat, Intl.DateTimeFormat…

EAO: Not convinced that the historical record matters. In order to dig this deep, it doesn’t matter…

PFC: Fair enough.

SFC: Looking historically is interesting…era is in version 1. Deliberate did not include “era” in the list. (updates issue) Given that this was in version 1 of the spec, there’s probably a reason. No one in this call was there. Maybe get in touch with Norbert Lindenberg. But maybe they don’t recall. That ws a long time ago. I’ll ask Naboysha.

SFC: When I thought about this PR, I thought it was wrong. But now I don’t know if it’s necessarily wrong.

PFC: So just close it. I want to hear if anyone shares my skepticism.

EAO: Don’t particularly care. But also not persuaded by the historical record.

SFC: I don’t want to unilaterally close this. Just because I’m sketpical doens’t mean I’ll just close it.

EAO: We have established behavior, established for a long while. Interesting in changing that behavior isn’t strong enough for us to change what’s there. Not sure we need another API to make things more accessible.

SFC: 2 parts. Standalone timezone, or era, could be motivated. If we close this, I wonder if we want other ways of getting at that data. Closing this PR allows us to move forward.

EAO: Not categorically opposed to something like that existing. I’m starting out skeptical for whether there’s a need. But if the case is made and it’s convincing, maybe we could have formatters.

RGN: My position is similar to EAO’s. I’d opt for this behavior…but this could be in use. Not sure if the motivation is strong enough. Not opposed, not enthusiastic either.

SFC: I get the sentiment of the room. My comments weren’t necessarily in opposition. I think the PR is unlikely to succeed. If we have evidence that no one is doing this, that could be evidence. I have to assume people are using it the other way.

SFC: Proposed conclusion:

"We feel that the proposed behavior is better, but we are skeptical that there are no users of the old behavior. If we see evidence to the contrary, we can revisit. But, we are confident enough in our skepticism that we would like to explore other avenues for supporting standalone time zone and era formatting, which was the original motivation for the pull request."

EAO: Metanote from previous discussion: wound’t be too hard for someone to query the…effectivelly pull all NumberFormat and Intl fomatter option bags for what’s in there…if such data were available, we could answer such questions. We don’t need to pose this question anew every time.

#### Conclusion

Next TG2 call, we will approve SFC's proposed conclusion.

### Review TG1 Agenda

PFC to add Intl Era Month Code.

EAO to add Trailing Zeros and Amount.

JMN to ensure that Anba's PR is added.
