# 2025-08-14 ECMA-402 Meeting

## Logistics

### Attendees

- Shane Carr - Google i18n (SFC), Co-Moderator
- Ujjwal Sharma - Igalia (USA), Co-Moderator
- Philip Chimento - Igalia (PFC)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Yusuke Suzuki - Apple (YSZ)
- Henri Sivonen - Mozilla (HJS)
- Aki Rose Braun - Ecma International (AKI)
- Louis-Aimé de Fouquières - Invited Expert (LAF)

### Standing items

- [Discussion Board](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/projects/2)
- [Status Wiki](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/wiki/Proposal-and-PR-Progress-Tracking) -- please update!
- [Abbreviations](https://github.com/tc39/notes/blob/master/delegates.txt)
- [MDN Tracking](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402-mdn)
- [Meeting Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/embed?src=unicode.org_nubvqveeeol570uuu7kri513vc%40group.calendar.google.com)
- [Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#tc39-ecma402:matrix.org)

## Status Updates

### Updates from the Editors

RGN: No major changes; we have had a handful of editorial PRs opened (and one merged).

RGN: But there has been recent activity on the Era and Month Codes proposal, which I’m excited to see advance.

### Updates from the MessageFormat Working Group

EAO: Process-wise, I’ve stepped up to chair the MFWG. It’s now official. Separately, we’ve been able to finalize the version of the spec the WG feels is fine for the upcoming CLDR release and we’ve submitted it to the CLDR-TC for review. They will make the final recommendation. The work leading up to getting that done is to know about the %percent function which is different from how we approach it in NumberFormat (using style option). There are separate unit and percent functions in MF. Structurally they still match what JS does. The options bags are a bit more specific. Still discussing how to do unit formatting in particular with the idea of supporting the ICU4X approach reading the data sooner rather than later. For date time formatting we have updated the spec and it’s different from how the DTF constructor works. It limits the capabilities of producing nonsensical results through structured skeletons.

### Updates from Implementers

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/wiki/Proposal-and-PR-Progress-Tracking

SFC: We have resolved most outstanding issues with the Temporal and intl-era-monthCode proposals. Three things left: datetime arithmetic, where we’re shipping two copies of the TZDB, and minor Test262 failures. Once these issues are resolved, an intent to ship for Temporal is on the horizon, that’s exciting progress.

YSZ: Not many updates from the JSC side. We need to have solid information and once we do we’d focus more on getting the Temporal implementation to the finish line.

SFC: Looks like we're a little behind on MDN, as well as implementations for the latest proposals.

### Point of Order: Agenda

EAO: I'd like to prioritize some of the topics from the Amouint proposal for next month.

SFC: OK. Let's coordinate over email and the GitHub board.

### Updates from the W3C i18n Group

SFC: Was talking to Addison about increasing collaboration, a few proposals in mind. An example is the Amount proposal. Also the time element and MessageFormat so there’s work we’re doing that we want to collaborate on. Ideally we’d have a liaison who would work between the groups. Ben had been attending both calls for a while. Ben could do it again. We just need someone to attend both the calls. We want to work on increasing the activity in the other group to introduce some of the work we’ve been doing.

### Updates from ECMA Liaison

AKI: About working with W3C, we’re in favor. We’re very encouraging. As far as the rules are concerned, there’s a few ways it can work. If your employer is a member of both, it’s fine to bounce around. If you’re not, you may join joint sessions which they’re already talking about, so it’s going to happen, it empowers working groups and technical committees to schedule and have joint meetings and technical committees, where you can actively work together and make decisions together. I think having somebody from TC39 TG2 always at the ITN working group, and someone from the ITN working group always at a TC39 TG2 meeting is great, it’s a wonderful way to stay on top of what everyone is doing. Is having a joint meeting an effective way to stay aligned, it’s so important to how they’re connected that it would be worth your time, even if it were an ad hoc meeting or off-schedule for some people.

USA: On the queue we have EAO

EAO: Figuring out a time and having at least one ad hoc joint meeting between these groups sounds like a great next step here.

EAO: At least technically, I’m a member of both and my issue is that I have currently one Mozilla meeting conflicting with the first half and a second for the other half. It’s problematic for me to join those calls regularly. If we go things ahead of time or demarcate topics, it would be really good and help us participate more

AKI: I’m willing to help facilitate this. There was the topic of horizontal planning, when do you want to talk about it?

SFC: Why don’t you give us a two minute overview and then we can move on to the agenda.

AKI: So W3C utilizing github labels internally has a pretty complex and effective horizontal review system, wherein certain working groups will always request a review from the security network whenever they have a PR, or whenever they’re about to cut a release. There’s a few different groups within W3C that’s it’s mandatory for them to review your work, and there’s some with cross-cutting concerns where it makes sense to consult another working group. Because it’s github labels we can do it in any scenario. I talked with [Phillipe] a little while ago and was in favor of having reviews with ECMA, what [Samina] and I support in theory is requesting reviews from the [missed ~5 seconds]

You wouldn’t allow a pending review to be a blocker, and you wouldn’t lose the right to merge the things that you think are the right things to merge, even if there’s disagreement, but it does give you insight into how groups working on similar problems think, or it might inspire them to work on something similar on their side. Samina and I support if you want it

## Proposals and Discussion Topics

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/projects/2

### Normative: Increase limits on Intl MV and explicitly limit significant digits #1022

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/pull/1022

USA: First we have this normative PR from SFC, would you like to introduce this?

SFC: This PR comes out of the last TG2 meeting, WH pointed out that we currently have a mechanism for enforcing minimum/maximum allowed values for String formatting in Intl.NumberFormat, this is the same range we had for many years, prior to NumberFormat v3 we cast it to a number. This was a fairly late-breaking change to the proposal, although WH was a reviewer it is possible he didn’t see when this change landed, it was implementer feedback ,we had accidentally dropped the limits when implementing v3. WH’s issue, as I understand it, is that the current range doesn’t support the format for Decimal, and if we changed it later there could be a webcompat issue, since they may get different results later if we increase the bounds. What I’ve done is put in a PR to increase those bounds now, while it’s relatively newer. To note, I’m not sure WH’s concerns are a webcompat problem, but if they are doing it now would make it easier for us. One issue we previously had was that we wanted the bounds to be something easy to implement, so I chose bounds both easy to specify and easy to implement, covering the full range of Decimal and a little bit more.

SFC: There’s one other side note, which is that the Amount proposal was looking into having limits for a similar reason, and if the Amount proposal – one possible outcome is that the bounds we choose here may be bounds for Amounts, though that is not a direct concern for TG2 since we are currently looking at bounds for NumberFormat. I wanted to note, though, that the Amount champions are looking at what we do here.

EAO: Do I recall right that if we’re formatting in BigInt, then this bound checking does not currently apply and will not apply, so effectively for BigInt the maximum limits continue to be implementation dependent.

SFC: Because this is in ToIntlMV and the second line directly returns the bigint so this only applies to strings

EAO: Yes, so this is fine, that’s just an observation, wanted to make sure it was not accidentally left out. One other alternative to this proposed PR is to leave out the bounds checking, meaning that it would be effectively implementation-defined, same as for BigInts. I would be fine with this as well, but the proposed limits of after ten thousand limits sounds fine to me as well.

SFC: As I’ve noted previously, I have a strong preference for having spec-defined limits. I find implementation-defined limits to be very big – it results in the same code working differently in different engines, which I don’t think is a good outcome for anyone. No one benefits from having an implementation-defined limit, everyone benefits from having a spec-defined limit. We had previously discussed in NumberFormat v3 that we prefer having limits, which is why we landed this in the first place. With regard to BigInt, there were implementation-defined limits, so we [...]. I do have a preference for spec-defined limits

EAO: Bigger note, we are increasing them by about two orders of magnitude. My only concern about this PR is whether it poses an unnecessary implementation burden on embedded or otherwise restricted engines, requiring them to support up to ten thousand limits, where an embedded solution may end up wanting to choose a much lower limit. Is there a sensible approach that could impose this restriction on browser implementations, for which I definitely agree that interop should be maintained. But to allow for non-web platforms to provide a different limit.

SFC: I can respond a little to that. I think that the bounds that are currently proposed are reasonable and could be implementable on – you mentioned it does allow strings of up to ten thousand digits, currently we only allow 350-ish, this allows up to ten thousands, which is as you said two orders of magnitude more digits. If we were to change them to have a limit that’s lower but still big enough for decimal I’m open to that - -that’s a thing we should be discussing here. As far as ICU4X is concerned, this is well within bounds for what they can handle, which is what I’d expect implementations to make use of.

EAO: Fair point. To be clear, I’m not recommending a lower limit, ten thousand makes sense for browser implementations and implementations relying on ICU implementations, I’m just pointing out that as we raise this at TG1 it may be a concern. In that case we have to discuss lower limits, or discuss some language that would allow for non-browser implementations to choose some lower limit.

SFC: Should we seek input from moddable on this.

USA: Action item to attend the next TG3 meeting? 

AKI: It’s on the 20th. 

SFC: Does anyone have concerns with this PR? I’m formally asking for TG2 approval, modulo the discussion we have with moddable. Since AKI is here, I wanted to note that this is non-binding, it’s useful for TG1 delegates to be the actual formal approval.

USA: I must say that it’s formal in the sense that for TG1 it’s clearly expressed that they would like formal approval from TG2. Moving on to next normative issue.

SFC: I will come back next month for TG2 approval. I would like more feedback, especially from implementers.

### Normative: Add [[CompactDisplay]] slot to Intl.PluralRules #1019

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/pull/1019

BAN: There are some cases in some languages with the compact form of notations where the difference between the short and long compact form may change the PluralRules that would apply to it. This PR puts that information through to the PluralRules prototype methods. One thing is that this data doesn’t yet exist in CLDR but down the road that data would indeed be used for resolving the result of these methods.

EAO: As a follow-on, should we start adding style=percent for PluralRules since it could also lead to a change in the plural selection rules.

SFC: Responding to EAO and then the PR as a whole. One issue is that when you’re speaking of a percent that’s already – the percent already has to be pluralized according to the number, especially if you’re using the long form of percent – in  “10 percent” the percent is already inflected. Something like “10 percent of voters”, what plural form is that – it doesn’t really have a name in English. You’re getting into a more complex grammatical situation than just a plural form. It’s a plural not just of the number itself, but the plural of a number with a unit attached to it. If we were to open this can of worms, it would be part of a bigger grammatical inflection effort, not just percent. With regard to the PR as a whole, it’s a good change, I will note that I’m not aware of any locale that has a difference between the plural form of compact short and compact long, they use the same data, CLDR does not have a mechanism for allowing different data between compact short and compact long. I think this is still a beneficial PR because I think implementations should have the option of having that sort of tailoring, especially in locales such as ‘fr’ where if they change the way they represent compact numbers it may be different. I wanted to repeat, though ,that no locale in CLDR currently has this or needs this as input, but it’s still a beneficial thing to put there.

USA: Regarding the point raised, we could have an issue to keep track of it. Regarding approval for this PR, we could give folks time to express strong views on it outside of what’s been raised already.

RGN: Looking for commentary on it here, I think it’s a good change to make here, even if the current changes are minimal or nonexistent.

RGN: +1

SFC: +1

#### Approvals:

- RGN
- SFC
- EAO

### Use more specific calendar-dependent operations in Until, Add, and ToISO #69

Specifically, the question about whether we are okay with ECMA-402 being the spec that defines a general calendar arithmetic algorithm, and if not, who should be that body.

https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-era-monthcode/pull/69

SFC: The comment I left yesterday summarizes my position on this PR. In the Intl Era Month Code proposal we’re defining the behaviour of monthCodes, the semantics of monthCodes, the semantics of arithmetical years, what we currently do is we handwave our way out of defining what we do with calendar arithmetic, there’s various things, various different aspects that calendrical algorithms that come into calculations.

SFC: When I talk about this I talk about conversions to fixed date and [missed]. We decided long ago that this is out of scope for ECMA-402, we defer to other bodies or leave it implementation-defined, and that’s what the spec currently does. The question here is regarding arithmetic. Say you have a date in the Chinese calendar, Hebrew calendar, Buddhist calendar. Things like “here’s my birthday, give me my birthday two years from now” or “subtract a year from this date,” or even “give me ten days later.” Calendar arithmetic is the main reason we have calendars in Temporal in the first place, without calendar arithmetic we could have treated it as a [..]

SFC: But one of Temporal’s main motivations is supporting calendar arithmetic, which is why we’re pulling non-gregorian arithmetic in scope. Currently we are describing in prose what it roughly should look like. If you go to the files change, you can see what this text looks like. It’s around line 1000, in the files changed. It basically is a paragraph that says “the behaviour is implementation-defined, but all calendars follow the general steps described here” is what the current spec. There are some calendars that are specified and some that are hand-wavey. I’m proposing to remove the line [] and add the line “calendars follow the steps here,” making sure that they’re spec language and not a general algorithm. PCO’s concern is that, well, calendar arithmetic is not in scope for ECMA-402, just like the translation of month names is out of scope for ECMA-402. Why should we make calendar arithmetic in scope? I argue that it’s in scope because ECMA-402 is defining month codes, era code, etc. No other spec currently does this. I think that Temporal has chosen to be the place where these questions are answered, and it’s answering these questions for the ISO calendar, and it should be responsible for answering these questions for non-Gregorian calendars, because no other group does. As an ICU implementer I need to know where to look to implement, but I don’t have that place. PCO argues that ECMA isn’t the place, well, then who is the place? If ECMA shouldn’t be the decision maker for this algorithm, who should? I don’t think it’s in scope for CLDR, because it deals with format but doesn’t know about calendrical calculations. I don’t think CLDR is the right body for that, if this group thinks that it is we can go there and figure that out. Are we okay making ECMA the body that defines this. I am okay with that, and the actual mechanical changes – do we approve this PR open that takes a general-steps implementation-defined algorithm and makes it an actual spec-defined algorithm.

PCO: I’ll just clarify my opinion. To start with, if I’m the only one here who thinks that this should be out of scope, that’s fine. The decision of what’s in-scope or out of scope is up to the editors, and not me. I’m certainly not going to stand in the way if I’m the only one who thinks this, but I guess my position is that I would not say that this body or even less TG1 has the interest and ability to make sure that specifying this down to the letter is correct. If I were an editor of this spec I would – I don’t think I would be qualified if someone came with a PR to change this language, I wouldn’t be qualified without a lot of research to decide if that’s correct. I’m drawing on my experience with time zones in Temporal, where even though all the information is right there in the tzdb and theoretically we have access to all this information, still writing these things down in algorithm steps rather than prose we kept finding edge cases that made the algorithm wrong, and had to be corrected. I’m kind of thinking that if we don’t have the expertise to stay on top of this calendar stuff, then even if there is currently no body that does, I’m not sure it should be ECMA, unless we want the scope to be staying on top of calendar research. Which is why I would prefer the prose description to leave leeway for implementations to say look, there’s an obvious answer here and we should just do it, which specifying it in an algorithm might preclude. If the general feeling is that this should be in scope, that’s fine.

RGN: I think that’s well-framed, I strongly agree. The editor group and this TG in general is not qualified to do this. We are a body that essentially maps internationalization and localization best practices into ecmascript, we are not the originators of the algorithms involved, and we’re not qualified to be – that’s not the composition of this group. I’m uncomfortable with addressing PRs with any algorithm we would produce for this purpose. 

USA: I’m of two minds – I understand that if we don’t have have these algorithms, it could be difficult to get the alignment that we’d expect, like copying Ecmascript functions and having the result, in general it would be harder to implement, but also over time if people come to the same conclusion of this and start implementing this, is TG2 the right place to come to check it, to check if our algorithms align with ours. There’s a benefit to appeal to a document that’s more appropriate, but also I can see the value of having more spec.

SFC: My comment here is I agree with everything, 90% of what PCO said and everything RGN said. Where I disagree is not on the principle, what I disagree is not on the principle, but on the characterization of this specific algorithm. I don’t believe it involves expertise on calendar systems, full stop. It is an algorithm that defines how the temporal content of arithmetical years / ordinal years works, it is not an algorithm that defines anything about calendars. That’s basically what I have to say. Temporal is defining an approach to how calendar arithmetic works, and saying it works based on arithmetical years and ordinal months, and it works consistently across all calendars including ISO. I think that’s a valuable thing for implementers to implement, to know it’s being implemented correctly.

HSI: The purpose of specs is to get interoperable implementations, so if you’re implementing Temporal where do you find the information? I feel that having gone this far with Temporal and Era Month Code in this group, this group has taken on quite a bit of calendar-related specification. So I think it’s worse if Temporal has places that are “okay, everyone really needs to do a thing here, but we’re not saying what the thing is, and we’re also not referring to a specific place.” If this was in some pre-existing spec in the space, you could point to that, but when it’s how the system is supposed to work, then not saying what it is is bad. And when there isn’t – we need to put this somewhere, it’s not a case that we could put it somewhere else and then refer to it. We should say here what implementors need to know. But to the extent that we can have these things here, we should. Even the option of telling implementors what they need to know, we should tell them. 

PCO: Based on how many unexpected things come up with relation to time zones, I expect similar unexpected things to come up in relation to this

SFC: I wanted to point out that the aspect that is calendar-specific is how to deal with leap months and common years. We landed a refactoring for this yesterday. The logic that’s in the PR that’s open does not directly deal with lunisolar calendars or anything calendar-specific. I’ll state what it does:

SFC: When you have a date and you want to add a year to it, you add a year in arithmetical space, you go to the next year, then you apply the constraint algorithm that’s the same as if you created it using the ‘with’ function instead of ‘dateAdd’. So when you add a month, you add a month – you go to the next ordinal month. If you add a day, you go to the next day. And it says it in properly mathematical terms. It’s not calendar-specific, it’s just general. It’s the one written by PCO, but it’s more formal. 

HSI: To point out – if editors don’t evaluate the correctness, that seems to be leaving it as an exercise for the implementor to figure out what to do. The role of the spec is to instead of giving this to implementors to figure out – and some of them might come up with wrong answers – we should consolidate this in the spec, meaning that editors will have to do research to see if it’s okay. But if the answer is that editors are unsure but we shouldn’t put it in the spec, that gives it to each implementor independently, which may lead to interop problems / duplicated work.

USA: Seconding SFC, the algorithms as defined are just a differently-structured version of what already exists, which is not something that I think would result in underspecifying, it uses the same language that SFC that kind of relies on this being specified elsewhere. There’s space for the – more calendar specific, what does it constitute to say “next day” in this calendar, that’s an open question, but saying something like “in whatever the way the calendar says go to the next day, go to the next day,” it’s taking the prose definition and structuring it as an algorithm. 

AKI:A reminder that you are not constrained to ECMA-402, if there’s something you think needs to be out in the world but not part of the standard, you could publish it as a separate standard or a technical report, you could publish it as a part 2 of ECMA-402, if you feel there’s something out there that should be published but that does not necessarily belong in ECMA-402

USA: I do feel like this particular topic and the idea of the specs for ths different calendars could be something that could benefit from, as we discuss with CLDR, as a different area of work, and it seems like an intersection between our work and theirs. But the idea that these calendar-specific bits are different than what we have in these functions is different given that they’re already talking in a very abstract way about these calendars.

SFC: My – I have a question for PCO, which is that I know your answer is probably going to be “I don’t know,” but what part of this algorithm do you anticipate being something that would change from calendar to calendar, meaning “add a year means go to the next year, adding a month means go to the next month,” where adding these things is defined in arithmetical space. What makes you concerned.

RGN: I mean, I can answer that from my perspective, which is that “when to constrain”, whether or not to constrain internally, and the direction of constraint, is the kind of things we saw issues in in ISO 8601, and would vary in non ISO calendars, and it’s similar in spirit to what you observed, when encountering a leap month is it appropriate to go forward or backwards.

SFC: I want to stress that this PR is not about direction of constraint, since it’s already there, it’s in the 2.7 proposal, it’s already there.

RGN: You asked what could vary, where it might be wrong, these are the aspects that stand out for me.

SFC: I want to throw one more thing in, a place where there could be a potential difference, let’s say… I’ll first make a claim that the only meaningful difference is in lunisolar calendars , we have leap month, let’s say we’re in a Chinese leap year, we have M06, there’s a leap month, we add a month, M06L, if there’s a leap month is the answer M06 or M07. I’ve done legwork and the answer is “when you say next month, it means next month, the next lunation,” meaning M06L. With regards to the Hebrew calendar, there’s rabbis that have disagreements, which is the reason why Temporal can/does/should answer that question, because it’s good for no one if Chrome decides to follow one rabbi and Firefox a different one, Chrome and Firefox are not in a position to do that research, there’s basically a disagreement there. It’s better for Temporal to make some decision in matters with ambiguity than to make no decision at all, and if some users don’t agree with how the algorithm, the answer is “we’re just following the general algorithm that temporal specifies and here’s how it applies to this calendar,” I think that’s a reasonable answer, I think it’s the job of ECMA-402 to answer that question.

PCO: This is a “do what I mean” thing, which I don’t think is appropriate in a specification but is appropriate in this situation.

EAO: Can you describe the difference that implementations might define different solution for, and how this computation resolves that.

SFC: The Hebrew calendar is a lunisolar calendar, meaning it has leap months, leap months appear slightly less than half of hte time, so if you’re in a Hebrew leap year, a year with a leap month, that month happens to be called Adar I, and you’re in that leap year and you want the same date next year, what is the date? Is it the date in Adar, the common month, or some other date. Most scholars agree that the answer is Adar. The opposite question, you’re in Adar and next year is a leap year, some say it should be Adar I, some say Adar II, I claim that RFC 77… already answered this question by defining Adar II to be month code M06. This is what the recurrence rules do, that’s a decision that spec has already made, they already made the decision over there, that owuld be a case where different rabbis could have different conclusions, the answer is that Adar + a year is Adar II. I wanted to reiterate one more time that this constraining behaviour is already there in the spec, it’s already there, I’m not adding it.

EAO: For this difference how does this proposal to change the spec fix the problem?

SFC: The spec says “add the year, apply the constraint algorithm”

LAF: How does today’s standard work on “29 Feb + 1 year ? 

SFC: To answer the question, the spec defines an answer, the default is that Feb. 29 becomes Feb 28 by default. I argue this algorithm should be consistent across all calendars instead of leaving it open to interpretation. 

RGN: SFC, you mentioned in response to the last topic that there was deference to RFC 7729, I’m not seeing any reference to it.

SFC: There’s not a normative reference to it, I misspoke. We referred to it when writing the spec but there’s not a normative reference to it.

RGN: I think that ought to be corrected, even if the reference isn’t normative. The fact that it’s used as prior art should be captured. 

SFC: That’s valid and I would agree. 

USA: We can count this as a next step. SFC, is there anything further to be discussed.

SFC: It sounds like it’s between me, PCO, and RGN about how much of this PR should be landed, I already pulled out pieces of things we agreed on that could be landed. It’s unclear to me what part of what’s left is objectionable.

PCO: I don’t feel the need to object to anything else, I’ve voiced my concerns and the decision shouldn’t be up to me to make it or block it. 

SFC: What I meant when I said objectionable is things that would apply to PCO’s concerns, and no one here disagrees with them, what I’m saying that I don’t think the PR as currently written is in conflict with these concerns, it’s compatible with the vision that you and RGN have with 402.

RGN: I believe that may be the case, I should scrutinize this further, I’m not at a point where I’m objecting to it.

USA: We can spare some time to review this and get back to it next meeting.

SFC: In terms of next steps, there should be a change related to appealing to RFC 7000, discuss next session

RGN: I do like pulling out parts and dealing with them separately.

SFC: Absolutely, thank you

PCO: I also think that that was very helpful.

USA: That’s that for this topic.

### Add W3C i18n Review as a stage advancement requirement #1021

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/pull/1021

SFC: This is the result of a discussion that I had with Addison Phillips, where we came up with several concrete ways for these groups to work more efficiently, one was to have a liaison relationship, AKI suggested formal group calls, this is something that came out of this discussion, to add to our stage advancement criteria is to have W3C i18n review. One concrete next step is basically have that something we self-enforce in TG2 as being a stage advancement requirement. There’s a process, I linked this process as a stage requirement. If you go to w3.org/international/review_request you go there and submit it. The proposal is to have this step to proposals going to TG2. Obviously we inherit all the requirements from TG1, but we already have precedent in TG2 of having additional requirements that proposals must meet before we recommend them. I’m proposing we add an additional requirement which is W3C i18n review. I’m proposing to make this a requirement, open to suggestions on whether this should be stage 2 or stage 2.7. I have it with the main review happening at stage 2 and a re-review before entering stage 3. I’m open to suggestions as to what’s the correct stage to have these reviews on. I’m open to feedback on whether this is the right place to put this in our process.

AKI: So, I love this, to start with, I think it’s a great idea, I’m excited about the idea of taking advantage of these reviews. I’m a little bit nervous about a complete review being required, because we cannot allow someone else not doing a thing to block our work. I’m not sure what the ideal wording here is, but opening a review request and giving them a certain amount of time to do the review would be more appropriate. So you have to open a review request, and you have to give them n weeks to do the review, that way if they are totally overloaded we can still move forward and plan for that review when it comes.

EAO: I was going to say the same thing that AKI said, but in different words. Agree 100%.

SFC: That’s reasonable. What I’ve written here is “must have a complete review”, sounds like having a w3c i18n review must have been requested at least 3 weeks prior to the TG2 meeting at which the proposal is considered for advancement.

AKI: Excellent, it’s a good thing to require the request, to have them give them time to do it, but not require that review. I think that’s fantastic. 

SFC: [reads reworded language of proposal]

AKI: I agree that the rewording is good
SFC: Comments or feedback on this process change? Do we have agreement to adopt this process change?

LAF: +1

EAO: For a new external dependency like this, do we need to ask TG1 or can we make this call ourselves?

AKI: From the position of the secretariat this wouldn’t require approval, since we are excited about horizontal reviews. It would be beneficial to tell them, but you do not need to ask them

SFC: anything from YSZ?

YSZ: I think that it is fine

HSI: Do we have an idea of the available bandwidth for reviews at W3C i18n. It’s good that we request this reviews and also not get external blocking dependencies, want to make sure we’re not blocked on them getting review done in timely matter, do we have prior explication of what their review bandwidth.

SFC: They have a weekly meeting, my understanding is that they don’t have as much of a backlog as we do.

BAN: +1

SFC: I’m hearing what I would characterize as consent, I think we can record that we can move forward with merging this PR, leave it open for maybe a week to give anyone unable to attend today time to chime in, that’s my conclusion.

EAO: Do I correctly understand that once this is implemented that we should ask for external review of trailing zeros, this boundary that we’ve introduced.

SFC: It would become a stage 3 requirement for that, so in effect yes. It’s a good thing in principle to do, and we should have in the guidelines to have this for stage 3.

EAO: So we can get set up with the labeling system or otherwise for this.

SFC: Yes, it’s a good test case. One observation is that given that this is only a stage entrance requirement not a PR requirement, we’re not opening these reviews for PRs, which should feed into whether we think something should be a PR or as a proposal, which is a discussion we’ve had many times, as of right now this only applies to proposals and not PRs.

EAO: The next one we should talk about is the Amount proposal, which got support from TG2 for proceeding to stage 2, but did not get that approval from TG1. Assuming it will be proposed to TG1 for stage 2 advancement, is there an expectation of that to also get a horizontal review at this stage, or is the requirement on Amount also now a stage 3 requirement?

SFC: Amount is in an interesting situation in that it’s not a 402 proposal. That being said that we can and should with the Amount proposal take a more active role with engaging in w3c in general, I don’t interpret it as a process requirement in that I don’t actually see Amount as being a TG2 proposal.

EAO: So that’s another good guinea pig for us to use, for asking for a review on Amount to see that this capability of asking for a review is not limited to TG2 but for all JS proposals, which I think AKI would appreciate.

AKI: +1

AKI: Thank you so much everyone.

### Unicode is planning to deprecate H24. What should browsers do? #1002

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/issues/1002

SFC: This is another item that wasn’t urgent, but this is now the last meeting to discuss this before CLDR 48 release. First, I wanted to verify that we all know what h24 means, if I grabbed them and asked what they thought it would mean, they would think it meant “24 hour clock.” but actually it means “24 hour clock that counts from 1 to 24, with no hour 0, which means the hour between midnight and 1 in the morning is hour 24”, and the hour between 1 in the morning and 2 in the morning is 1. CLDR is considering deprecating it because no locale in the world uses this. Added for consistency with h11 and h12, which do have real uses, argument from symmetry as far as we can tell, but no locale uses it, has contributed to large amount of confusion because generally users want h23. CLDR wants to deprecate it, we all agree it’s bad, no one should use it, but the question I have for this group is that we’ve supported it since version 1, what do we do after Unicode deprecates h24? If there’s code that – I’m pretty sure Hiram’s Law applies here, there is code using it, I think there’s a 99.99% chance there’s code using it that was written to get the behaviour they thought they should have had, which is just “use 24 hour clock,” if anyone disagrees I can go and get evidence for it, I don’t consider it a thing we need evidence for. So what do we do after CLDR deprecates it?

SFC: Options: 

1. fall back to the default locale behavior. If h24 doesn’t exist, then inherit from the default locale behaviour, much like if you specified h25 or some other nonexistent hour cycle
2. Fall back to H23 behavior
3. We keep supporting it. This means ICU4X needs to start supporting it, even though it’s legacy
4. Depends on if there’s significant usage

Markus prefers option 1, I prefer option 2, HSI prefers option 2, Robert pointed out that the one use case is in certain countries that uses Japan’s 30 hour system, but that’s not actually what h24 does.

CLDR is seeking advice from this body on what we think the safest thing to do with regard to webcompat, which CLDR can take and decide how to update its specification, we were asked for feedback, I tried to make the case to CLDR that h24 should fall back to h23, CLDR was not convinced, said if we should remove h24 we should remove it rather than to make it be an alias, I look for input on whether it would actually be a webcompat problem.

EAO: I think, first of all, that a user putting in h24 as the value inputted is – the clearest understanding of the intent is that they wanted a 24 hour clock. From that POV that seems the most sensible thing for us to do. Separately, I think we can make a different decision than ICU, because ICU gets to do major version updates where they break stuff. We don’t get to do that. From an ICU library update POV, just dropping support for h24 makes sense, but we cannot do that. This is why I think – we can’t make code that’s currently out there and asking for h24 start failing when we can interpret that request as “give me 24 hour time please,” so specifically in ECMA-402 this should be an alias for h23. They might do the same, they might drop support.

HSI: We all now that whenever this occurs the intent was what h23 means, so option 2 gives the intended behaviour. We shouldn’t do option 3 because it needs to be in the underlying libraries, we should make it possible for ICU4X not support h24. Throwing an exception is obviously not webcompat, option 1 means if locale happens to have 12 hour clock as default, well, currently with h24 one hour of the 24 hours is rendered wrong, in nighttime, maybe situations where no one is noticing even though they meant h23, if we did option 1 we would break not just one hour of 24, but all of them, and then only in the cases where – then it depends on something else, so option 2 is most obviously the thing that needs the least ongoing software support, option 3 would need ongoing software support, option 2 is what everyone knows the authors intended, so let’s not make it complicated, let’s make it an alias, end of story. 

SFC: I think I’m next on the queue. What Rich Gillam wrote here in this comment is the feeling of the other people in the CLDR TC, but I think HSI’s point about requiring ongoing software support is not something brought up explicitly in this comment. I agree that we should have an outcome that doesn’t require ongoing software support. I think if we do option 2, fall back to h23, agree with EAO on this, would be less work for everyone defining this everywhere. Devil’s advocate: if a user defines h24, well, by falling back to h12 that makes the programming mistake more obvious, if we fall back to h23 it doesn’t inform the programmer that they’ve made a mistake.

YSZ: I also prefer option 2, the reason is the same ask other folks, but basically the intent of using h24 is not using am/pm, they really want to have a 24 hour clock. I think where the user sees option 23 and 24, the intent is not having am/pm, therefore if the locale is showing am/pm that’s surprising behaviour. I prefer option 2.

HSI: For the programming error question, we should look at w3c priority of constituencies, web is first for users then for web authors, then implementers, then spec writers, so users are higher than either implementors/spec writers/web developers. THerefore we shouldn’t break what the user experiences, and if the system is meant to do 24 hour clock, that’s the concept the system is going for, using this to alert the web developer, putting an annoyance to the user whose needs should be higher, we should not expose the user to am/pm if the developer did h24. If we want to alert the developer, the right way is to complain on the js console on the browser, it’s fine to suggest something like that, but I would like this kind of alias behaviour in this case be possible to move all the way to the underlying libraries and if the alias resolution – depending on where in the stack it’s done – it might not be practical to emit a console warning, obviously the spec can’t require diagnostics anyway, but if we should want to suggest one it should be a suggestion so that it’s okay to push the alias resolution down the stack if there is not a good solution for alerting the web developer, but if someone wants to alert the developer the console warning should be the correct place.

EAO: I agree with HSI. I would like to note that islamicc and islamic-rgsa we ended up including in the proposal – I don’t remember the exact name – the text “should emit a warning if possible”, so noting that if we now do that for this as well we are clearly setting a precedent of expecting deprecated values that become aliases that they should become console warnings, so it would be weird to not do that. Also wanted to make clear that we are setting a precedent. 

SFC: Everyone with something to say today was generally in favour of option 2. I think that we can definitely conclude that we will do option 2 in this group, regardless of what CLDR will do, and if it requires implementations to do that mapping on their own, that’s fine, but whatever change, if we need to make changes, then we will make those changes. The question is then do we send this back to the CLDR working group to decide if the web is doing a thing do we really want to do a different thing, and they can decide, and that’s fine. And then we can decide if we want to do a console warning, I don’t have a strong opinion, we can have an agenda item next month to see if that should be normative or if we should put a horizon on how long to keep doing it, or something like that.

### Normative: Don't add default formatting to lone timeZoneName #958

Specifically, my last comment that seeks consensus on the following statement: "We feel that the proposed behavior is better, but we are skeptical that making this change would not break the web. If we see evidence to the contrary, we can revisit. But, we are confident enough in our skepticism that we intend to close this pull request and explore other avenues for supporting standalone time zone and era formatting, which was the original motivation for the pull request."

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/pull/958

SFC: last month I wrote up his text (PR 958), and asked to see agreement on the conclusion [given there]. Have people had a chance to review it, and review the text I had written?

EAO: Yes, it’s fine. 

USA: +1

PCO: +1. Better if we do the research, I don’t have the bandwidth for it right now, it’s the only sensible conclusion.

LAF: +1

SFC: Yes, this conclusion leaves the door open to if someone does the research we can take that into account, but with our default being skeptical. Skeptical, still open to research is the spirit of this. Other comments?

### Normative: Don't add default formatting to lone era #957

Specifically, my last comment that seeks consensus on the following statement: "We feel that the proposed behavior is better, but we are skeptical that making this change would not break the web. If we see evidence to the contrary, we can revisit. But, we are confident enough in our skepticism that we intend to close this pull request and explore other avenues for supporting standalone time zone and era formatting, which was the original motivation for the pull request."

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/pull/957

SFC: Same as previous issue. I did ask ncirc about this text, [see comment from github thread], still think the text as written stands. I do think we should solve this problem, but my conclusion is that the approach here has too much risk and we should explore other avenues. Does the same set that agreed for the time zone PR also agree on this one.

USA: +1

EAO: Yes for me

PCO: +1

### Editorial: Simplify NumberFormat #978

https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/pull/978

SFC: This is the one RGN wrote on March 5, we had previously discussed it in TG2, I don’t know if we’ve really reached a conclusion here. Basically the proposal,  in RGN, it folds unsigned rounding mode into the regular rounding mode table, so that we no longer have a separate concept of an unsigned rounding mode. My pushback is that having the concept is useful to implementers, because it’s a sufficiently non-obvious concept that it’s useful for the specification to pull it out into its own thing. It’s editorial, has no impact on users. That’s currently the state of things, not sure what next steps are, don’t like having perpetually open pull requests that are results of conflict between my position and RGN’s perspective.

RGN: I’m noting that these discussions are difficult to have in the context of looking at the source for the spec. One of the goals that I have already implemented for the ECMAScript pull request template is that I owe for 262 and also want for 402 is aboult the spec rendering [?] rather than look at changes to td elements in spec. Hopefully that will be ready for next meeting, since we’re out of time, and get a better comparison for what the spec looks like. It’s intended for readers of spec.

USA: I think we could track that, it might be as simple as asking [Jordan] to set it up.

RGN: Yes, it is, I asked about propagating the changes. Once it’s ready he’ll review it / request changes.

USA: Basically we should be able to get this done with an action. 

SFC: Looking forward to next month, and getting more of these issues into the agenda! Have an excellent afternoon/evening, wherever you may be

### Henri's Writup, Standard Measures with U.S. English

https://github.com/mozilla/explainers/blob/main/standard-measures-en-us.md

[deferred to next meeting]
